[Unknown]: आई वी एम
[Amit Varma]: As if it is a benign power full all knowing entity that has a legitimate authority over our lives.
[Amit Varma]: But in truth government consists of human beings like you and me who respond incentives and their own self interest.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, the sharpest way to study and understand government is to use economics because economics is after all, the study of human behavior.
[Amit Varma]: human behavior and for a country like india with the tentacles of a parasitic and predatory
[Amit Varma]: government are present everywhere the most fascinating branch of economics to study
[Amit Varma]: is that which deals with government public choice theory
[Unknown]: welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics politics and behavioral science
[Amit Varma]: please welcome your host amit barwa welcome to the scene in the unseen i've been reading and
[Amit Varma]: writing about public choice theory for a while now and write a monthly column on it linked in
[Amit Varma]: the show notes for bloomberg quint so when my friend pavan srinath who hosts the show the pragati
[Amit Varma]: podcast asked me to come on his show as a guest to talk about public choice theory i agreed with
[Amit Varma]: the caveat that i was not an expert but an enthusiast indeed at some point in time i plan
[Amit Varma]: to do a series of episodes on this subject for the scene in the unseen with my economist friend
[Amit Varma]: in new york shruti rajagopalan in fact we may do a whole separate podcast on it or maybe write
[Amit Varma]: a book together but as of now you have me and i decided to run this episode of the pragati podcast
[Amit Varma]: as a special episode of the scene in the unseen do note that this episode was recorded at the end
[Amit Varma]: of march on the very day when i published my final editorial for pragati the online magazine
[Amit Varma]: i think pragati.com that i edited and pavan contributed to which shut down on that day
[Amit Varma]: so that does come up in the conversation but before we cut to that let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break this episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by storytel storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your android or ios app they have thousands of
[Amit Varma]: audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile including hundreds in local languages like hindi
[Amit Varma]: and marathi and unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 2.99 per month and you can
[Amit Varma]: also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to storytel.com slash ibm i actually use storytel
[Amit Varma]: myself regularly so as long as i sponsor the show i'm going to recommend one book a week that i
[Amit Varma]: love the book i want to recommend today is a book called dear life by alice munro alice munro is my
[Amit Varma]: favorite living writer she's a short story writer based in canada she's got the book
[Amit Varma]: international price as well as a nobel prize for literature and although most of her work
[Amit Varma]: is in the form of short stories she has a unique ability to compress so much depth into each short
[Amit Varma]: story that you feel like it's a novelistic universe of all the books the one that is
[Amit Varma]: available in storytel and i recommend you read is a collection called dear life and remember
[Amit Varma]: you get a 30-day free trial only at storytel.com slash ibm
[Guest]: hi amit it's such a pleasure to have you back here on the pragati podcast it's a greater pleasure
[Guest]: for me to be back on your show thank you for having me amit first off i want to say that
[Guest]: the pragati podcast is here today and i am in podcasting today primarily because of you right
[Guest]: you gave us the nudge you told us that this was possible and you also showed us that it was
[Guest]: possible with the seen and the unseen and hamsini and i both started and now between hamsini and me
[Amit Varma]: we have three podcasts uh that are currently active every week it wasn't my intention to
[Amit Varma]: spark anything off i mean i was here at pragati and we thought let's do more podcasts and you
[Amit Varma]: guys were so amazing like fish to water you just you know i struggled more when i started the scene
[Guest]: in the unseen but you guys were just naturals from day one no no it was easier because you were here
[Guest]: giving us lots of advice as well but amit before we talk about uh conversation today i also wanted
[Guest]: to mention how now it's uh pragati as the online magazine has come to a close as of the end of
[Guest]: march and so now we will be continuing as a primarily podcast and audio platform so tell us
[Guest]: a little bit about your journey sort of editing pragati over the last two years yeah so pragati i
[Amit Varma]: must point out existed long before me it was started in 2007 by nithin bhai your colleague
[Amit Varma]: uh who also started dakshashila institution then and it was it started as a pdf magazine then it
[Amit Varma]: became a print magazine and it focused on policy and went out to like policymakers everywhere it
[Amit Varma]: was read in the pmo and the foreign office and very influential and then 2016 they took a hiatus
[Amit Varma]: and around the end of 2016 nithin got in touch with me and he'd known me from my blogging days
[Amit Varma]: and he said that why don't you uh come on board and let's relaunch it and what we were driven by
[Amit Varma]: was that political discourse was so incredibly polarized everything was personalized you know
[Amit Varma]: you you didn't focus on the argument anymore you questioned the intent intent and parentage of the
[Amit Varma]: other person and we thought we want something which is we want to create a space which is not
[Amit Varma]: shrill not shouty where we will not focus on parties or people but we will focus on policy
[Amit Varma]: and ideas and obviously within dakshashila itself there were a bunch of really good
[Amit Varma]: uh writers and we decided we won't now position it only for like policymakers and
[Amit Varma]: uh the elite so to say but more to anyone uh any thinking layperson who is curious about the world
[Amit Varma]: it could be a 15 year old boy it could be your grandmother and that's kind of what we set out to
[Amit Varma]: do and we did that successfully for a couple of years and one of the things that worked among the
[Amit Varma]: many that i'm proud of on the site is that we got podcasts going and uh and podcasts are just like
[Amit Varma]: unique to me because with everything else that you do like if you're reading a piece on the screen
[Amit Varma]: or whatever all the other distractions in the world apply you can click on netflix you can get
[Amit Varma]: up and go and make a cup of coffee you can look out of the window you can do all kinds of other
[Amit Varma]: things podcasts are a unique use case in a sense because people listen to podcasts while doing one
[Amit Varma]: of three things mostly which is commuting exercising or doing household errands though the
[Amit Varma]: third not so much in india because you know how domestic help and all of that but in though i i do
[Amit Varma]: listen sometimes while cooking if it's automatic but i listen while working out and commuting
[Amit Varma]: therefore you have an almost captive audience a guy has decided to listen to the thing he is
[Amit Varma]: listening the level of engagement that you can get on a long podcast uh where you're not constrained
[Amit Varma]: by space is also wonderful because once you can make a guest relax and you know then they can just
[Amit Varma]: go on and you can go into tangents you can go into depths and nuances and all of that so i think
[Amit Varma]: what i'm proud of at pragati is that we have a like at the time of uh leaving we had like
[Amit Varma]: five podcasts which would come out every week you know you have a couple of podcasts of pragati
[Amit Varma]: podcast talia retain canada hamsini has states of anarchy uh pranay and sort of have the hindi
[Amit Varma]: podcast for yabazi and i'm proud that we created a culture of that and i'm looking forward with
[Guest]: great excitement to how dakshashila takes it forward thanks amit and you know we're having
[Guest]: this conversation on the eve of elections and honestly i'm hard pressed to see where there are
[Guest]: enough conversations where one person is not shouting and i don't think it's a conversation
[Guest]: if one person is shouting right so all of television is gone either they're shouting
[Guest]: or even if it's a more cogent discussion people get three minutes to make a point
[Guest]: four minutes to uh rebut something not really necessarily go into the depth that many of
[Guest]: india's various challenges deserve right so i'm i mean we are still small but i i like the fact
[Guest]: that we have the space i love the fact that i have the space where i can just come and have
[Guest]: a conversation with someone for an hour and you know other people actually want to listen to it
[Amit Varma]: i think you know the key here is that i had an episode with ashok malik once on indian television
[Amit Varma]: and his insight there was that television licenses and generally costs of just operating
[Amit Varma]: a station are so high that everyone who's paid those hundreds of crores or whatever to start a
[Amit Varma]: channel has no option then but to cater to the lowest common denominator to get their money back
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the shoutiness that you see on republican times now and the nuance that is
[Amit Varma]: absent everywhere because you want to attract the lowest common denominator and you have to those
[Amit Varma]: are your imperatives those are your incentives because you put in so much money that's also why
[Amit Varma]: for example fm radio is all so populist because fm licenses are so high to this you can't do any
[Amit Varma]: issue you have to cater to the lowest common denominator while if you look at new york they
[Amit Varma]: have i think you guys had an episode on the pragati podcast with amit doshi where he made
[Amit Varma]: a similar point then new york has so many fm stations because it's not so expensive to get
[Amit Varma]: in there so you can try and target different niches and we are fortunate in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: look if you had to buy a podcast license for 10 crores then everybody who did a podcast would
[Amit Varma]: have to put bollywood music or or cricket or cricket or things like that so we are fortunate
[Amit Varma]: that the barriers to entry are practically nothing and we can go in there and and then
[Amit Varma]: the thing is that everybody finds their niche they can experiment for free and they find their
[Amit Varma]: space and they get their audience you know my show has a certain audience your show is a slightly
[Amit Varma]: different audience it's wonderful and it's amazing and i think that's what gives me hope
[Amit Varma]: that fine that this course is whatever it is but there are all kinds of quiet nooks and corners
[Guest]: where people are having these kind of conversations no i'm amazed at some of the recent episodes you
[Guest]: have had you touched for two hours now in an episode it's incredible that that's a podcast
[Guest]: and now so many people are actually tuning in and listening to it though my pro tip here is always
[Guest]: listen at double speed i can't stand myself at normal speed it's horrible same i i 1.5 1.6 for
[Guest]: me minimum yeah uh but uh okay so let's get on with our topic of the show and it's also relevant
[Guest]: for us to have this conversation on the eve of the national elections in india amit you've been
[Guest]: talking about public choice and public choice theory for quite some time and how it can shed
[Guest]: new light on you know why things are the way they are when it comes to the government in india and
[Guest]: with other things so tell me a little about what public choice is all about so public choice is
[Amit Varma]: really my favorite branch of economics and i keep saying that it's see economics to me you know
[Amit Varma]: it's not some arcane subject economics is the subject of human behavior under conditions of
[Amit Varma]: scarcity but basically it's the study of human behavior and public choice is a branch of that
[Amit Varma]: which has incredible insights for the state of india today if you want to understand the indian
[Amit Varma]: state the indian government why are people corrupt why do politicians behave the way they do
[Amit Varma]: all of those things and it helps in the central insight of public choice theory is this that
[Amit Varma]: people in government whether they're politicians or bureaucrats are human beings who respond to
[Amit Varma]: incentives so you know economists speak in terms of incentives and they're like okay
[Amit Varma]: this is how within this market different parties behave these are the incentives they have
[Amit Varma]: and you must also think of government like that and when you look at government action
[Amit Varma]: everything becomes explicable if you look at it through the lens of interest now i write a
[Amit Varma]: monthly column for lumber quint which is called politics without romance which is a phrase by
[Amit Varma]: james buchanan the father of public choice theory in a sense because politics without romance is
[Amit Varma]: what public choice theory is you look at politics without romance you look at the incentives of
[Amit Varma]: people you know how people really are and the first column of those in fact examined the question
[Amit Varma]: that people often ask a lot that you know back in the days of independence we had so many great
[Amit Varma]: leaders uh you know but today you look at all the politicians they're all venal corrupt guys
[Amit Varma]: why and people bemoan it as if you know we had good people then we have bad people now lots of
[Amit Varma]: nostalgia gone are the great days of you know stalwart leaders who could whether it's nehru or
[Amit Varma]: patel or whoever your favorite hero of choices but my point is that it's not that we had great
[Amit Varma]: leaders then and we had great leaders now we had great incentives and and the incentives that we
[Amit Varma]: have now are guaranteed to produce us venal crooks and the reason for that for example is that
[Amit Varma]: what animated the people who fought for india's freedom uh they had no chance of getting to
[Amit Varma]: government they had no chance of getting to power and making money from it so those sort of baser
[Amit Varma]: instincts were not there people who wanted to make money or have power over others did other
[Amit Varma]: things they did not fight for india's freedom because the the the risk reward ratio was way
[Amit Varma]: out of whack so all of these people were high-minded people who were driven by principles
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth and therefore you have all these great leaders and if you look at that
[Amit Varma]: generation of leaders in the 30s and 40s and so on the nehru's and patel's and even the shama
[Amit Varma]: prashad mukherjee's and so on it doesn't matter which side of the spectrum you are they are
[Amit Varma]: animated by higher principles whether or not you specifically agree with those principles
[Amit Varma]: what we have today is that you're animated by different things the state is such a bloated
[Amit Varma]: beast and there is so much power that typically what are the incentives for a politician the
[Amit Varma]: incentives for a politician is i want to win the next election and come to power so he needs two
[Amit Varma]: things for this one is he needs money because elections in india are incredibly costly the
[Amit Varma]: money comes to him from special interest groups and that means that they want a quid pro quo of
[Amit Varma]: some sort so it could be for example an association of small retailers who pays you money and in
[Amit Varma]: return for their funding you you have to look after their interest maybe by banning fdi and
[Amit Varma]: retail so and this is a very concrete example because bjp until recently used to be against fdi
[Amit Varma]: in retail because they were a party funded by small retailers and the aam aadmi party in delhi
[Amit Varma]: still is against fdi in retail and you have any kind of interventions in markets like that
[Amit Varma]: typically what they're doing is they're harming the consumer at large to the benefit of the small
[Amit Varma]: interest group in this case you're harming all the consumers who would benefit from a more
[Amit Varma]: competitive retail market and they're benefiting the small retailers in question and so people say
[Amit Varma]: for example arvind kejriwal isn't corrupt but hey you know what is this corruption is an inbuilt
[Amit Varma]: part of the political the electoral system but anyway i don't want to you know we shouldn't name
[Amit Varma]: specific politicians here so the point is that this is one of the incentives of politicians
[Amit Varma]: today are driven by the interest groups that play on whose money they are dependent so it is not just
[Amit Varma]: that you know prime minister modi people say is captured by ambani adani it's like come on i mean
[Amit Varma]: every government was ever was captured by ambani you basically have you know different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: interest groups running the show and the second kind of pressure group is voters because india's
[Amit Varma]: politics is all identity politics it's the first pass of votes vote system it's a very fractured
[Amit Varma]: electorate and therefore every election typically goes down to figuring out which are your vote
[Amit Varma]: banks will this caste support me will that particular class of people support me what is
[Amit Varma]: your vote bank and then catering to that vote bank and using patronage to benefit that vote bank in
[Amit Varma]: some way so that you get their votes so therefore all politicians are caught up in this endless
[Amit Varma]: cycle between power and money where then necessarily have to play these kind of games
[Amit Varma]: and sell themselves out completely to get to power which then ensures that the only kinds of
[Amit Varma]: people that politics attracts are people like that people who don't mind their principles being
[Amit Varma]: corroded and all of that who don't really care about the public service because where's the
[Amit Varma]: incentive now those kind of people you won't see in politics anymore it's people like this
[Guest]: so in a sense when we're talking about public choice then basically you're saying that people
[Guest]: in power or government itself and those who are taking decisions are also governed by the same
[Guest]: kind of economic logic that governs markets and so on so in that sense a politician here is a
[Guest]: rational maximizer right of some sort where they're sort of maximizing their interest which
[Guest]: is how do if i'm in power how do i stay in power and how do i get re-elected and so so in this
[Guest]: context i want to ask about this voting process right so you talked about identity politics a
[Guest]: little but so we as voters if we are notionally rational people why should we vote especially
[Guest]: when there are corrupt politicians with other interests on the other side that's a rational
[Amit Varma]: question and that leads to let me first answer questions of why we should not vote and then i'll
[Amit Varma]: come to why we should vote and i'll have more reasons of the former kind but i think we should
[Amit Varma]: look at both sides of the case there are three reasons why we should not bother about voting
[Amit Varma]: one is what economists call rational ignorance now here's the thing you and i both know that
[Amit Varma]: uh it is likely that our single vote is not going to influence an election we might go to vote
[Amit Varma]: anyway on the day of voting but we know that a single vote is very unlikely to influence an
[Amit Varma]: election therefore since the benefit of that single vote is so little it is rational also
[Amit Varma]: not that the cost should be little and that we don't spend too much on it what does that mean
[Amit Varma]: that means that voters don't spend enough time understanding the processes of government and
[Amit Varma]: what different policies different parties have and how the state works and so on it doesn't make
[Amit Varma]: sense for them to spend too much time studying those things because the benefit is very little
[Amit Varma]: one vote is not going to do much so it is rational for them to be ignorant that's called
[Amit Varma]: rational ignorance and in fact there's a philosopher jason brennan who will be on my
[Amit Varma]: show soon i've already recorded with him who in a book not the one i'm talking about in my episode
[Amit Varma]: with him but in a separate book examines the ethics of voting jason brennan and he in fact
[Amit Varma]: makes the argument that it is immoral to vote if you don't know enough that if you are ignorant
[Amit Varma]: then your vote could do more harm than good and therefore that is a reason to not vote but i mean
[Amit Varma]: that's a normative argument for not voting but if you look at it in practical terms rational
[Amit Varma]: ignorance is why you will find that voters tend to be ignorant and that many of them because
[Amit Varma]: ignorant they decide what's the point and they just it's rational not to vote as well
[Amit Varma]: second reason which is kind of related and which has something to do with public choices
[Amit Varma]: if you look at all of politics it involves a redistribution of resources from the many to the
[Amit Varma]: few right so for example in the example that i'd used earlier banning fdi in retail all the
[Amit Varma]: consumers at large lose a little value and all of that goes to certain interest groups and that's
[Amit Varma]: known as diffuse costs and concentrated benefits the costs are diffused so if i have had like if
[Amit Varma]: i'm getting two rupees a month taken away from my pocket i don't really give a damn but you take
[Amit Varma]: away you do that from 20 million people and then you give 40 million rupees to one interest group
[Amit Varma]: it matters a lot for that interest group so that interest group will then be very motivated and
[Amit Varma]: very incentivized to interfere in politics and do things but for me because i am you know it's
[Amit Varma]: only two rupees i may not even know it's the unseen effect as it were i may not even know i'm
[Amit Varma]: losing that two rupees i won't be that incentivized or motivated to actually go out and vote or to
[Amit Varma]: protest in other ways and because people very often don't know the harm that is being done to
[Amit Varma]: them because it's an unseen effect it's what does not happen uh you know they don't get that extra
[Amit Varma]: value from something they don't know they haven't got it that they might be apathetic about voting
[Amit Varma]: a third reason not just for not voting but for also not for participating in civic action is
[Amit Varma]: what is called the free rider problem which is that for example somewhere let us say a dam is
[Amit Varma]: coming up it will do a lot of damage so you will find you know the medha patkar and those activists
[Amit Varma]: they will be leading it and there will be those normal NGO groups which will be leading it which
[Amit Varma]: have their own incentives but whatever but let us say that you know that the dam affects you
[Amit Varma]: adversely or the policy affects you adversely but you'll say it's affecting a million people
[Amit Varma]: adversely let them do the action in a similar way if there is like a bad politician or somebody who
[Amit Varma]: should be out of power it is tempting therefore to think that my vote won't make a
[Amit Varma]: difference make you go let others vote the person out let others put in the effort
[Amit Varma]: and in a democracy the free rider problem is a bit of a problem a fourth reason for voting which
[Amit Varma]: is actually my reason for not voting and it only applies if all the options are equally unpalatable
[Amit Varma]: so i would consider it my duty to go out and vote if i found that one party was substantially
[Amit Varma]: better than the rest but if all the parties are equally bad perhaps unwise in the long run to
[Amit Varma]: choose the least evil option instead of not voting at all because think of the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace as a marketplace let's say i want to buy a shirt i go to the mall all the shirts
[Amit Varma]: there are crap right so the best thing for me to do is to not settle for the worst shirt and
[Amit Varma]: to not buy a shirt at all and my not buying a shirt the absence of the activity sends a signal
[Amit Varma]: to the market that there is a gap in the marketplace and some entrepreneur will come
[Amit Varma]: and fill the gap similarly by not voting uh you know you can see the statistics that these many
[Amit Varma]: percentage of people don't vote and any political entrepreneur can then see that and say that there
[Amit Varma]: is so much apathy these people there's a gap in the market let us go in and try to fill the gap
[Amit Varma]: and this is especially valid in what is a fractured marketplace where you can get 25 percent of the
[Amit Varma]: vote and win a seat and if 25 percent of the people aren't voting then it makes sense for
[Amit Varma]: somebody to an entrepreneur to say that i'm going in there and in a sense uh without necessarily
[Amit Varma]: parsing those numbers that is what arvind kejriwal did with the aam aadmi party he recognized that
[Amit Varma]: there was widespread apathy among voters and that there was widespread disillusionment with
[Amit Varma]: the existing political parties and he positioned himself quite perfectly and quite brilliantly as
[Amit Varma]: an alternative who was different from the rest and he went in and he occupied that space which
[Amit Varma]: in that limited political marketplace of delhi at that time worked now whether you think much
[Amit Varma]: of kejriwal or not as it happens i don't this illustrates the point that if there is a gap in
[Amit Varma]: the marketplace somebody may come and fill it and i think therefore it is my duty as a citizen to
[Amit Varma]: indicate my dissatisfaction with all of the choices available these are all arguments for
[Guest]: not voting the innocence even the trump came into power in a similar manner right one of the reasons
[Guest]: why a lot of the polls went wrong a lot of the predictions went wrong was that trump was able
[Guest]: to mobilize people who would generally not vote and get them to the polling booths in much much
[Guest]: larger numbers and you know tip the balance and again created a market and you can call it a
[Guest]: a perverse market but he created a space where he could get enough people to vote for whatever he
[Amit Varma]: claimed to stand for that's spot on and also what even before you know the elections happened out
[Amit Varma]: there and i wrote a column sort of speculating on why trump may get either more or you may do
[Amit Varma]: better or worse than people anticipate and my speculation on why he may do much better than what
[Amit Varma]: the poll suggests is because of something called preference falsification which is that when a
[Amit Varma]: pollster asks you certain questions you tend to often go with the social consensus in terms of
[Amit Varma]: what you are stating and if you know if the people around you view trump as whatever as a bigoted guy
[Amit Varma]: or as a complete whatever you don't own up to saying i'll vote for trump but when the time
[Amit Varma]: comes you go out and you actually vote for trump which is you know what economists call revealed
[Amit Varma]: preferences where your actions count more than your words and i think with a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: because of this sort of elite condescension of trump voter so to say they wouldn't have said
[Amit Varma]: that we will vote for trump but they went out and voted for him anyway and you might see less
[Amit Varma]: of that falsification in the 2020 elections because you know the both sides are now so
[Amit Varma]: polarized and people are more open about saying that they support him and well he is the sitting
[Amit Varma]: president but that's again a case of how the incentives come into play where there is a factor
[Amit Varma]: of social desirability that you don't want to you know but at the same time you're doing what
[Guest]: you want to do you know it's this is funny because i have lost count of the number of
[Guest]: non-profits media houses and others who have done these pre-election voter surveys in india
[Guest]: where they ask people in various constituencies you know what issue matters to you the most or
[Guest]: is corruption important to you would you vote for a corrupt politician you're going to say yes
[Guest]: corruption matters to me and no i will not vote for a corrupt politician because who will
[Guest]: actually come out and say in a survey that yeah i don't care about corruption but then they'll go
[Guest]: and vote for exactly who they want to vote right uh but but in this so you've given me a lot of
[Guest]: a lot of good reasons why one shouldn't vote and the odd thing about india seems to be that
[Guest]: a large number of people somehow still end up voting right i mean what 60 to 70 percent of
[Guest]: indian electorate votes that's a higher percentage than the united states and many other major
[Guest]: reasonably well-functioning democracies in the world and even here you know we see urban numbers
[Guest]: being lower but from what i can sense even our election apparatus is of a sort where you know
[Guest]: we're not able to capture mobility well so even the urban vote if they say oh it's only 45 that
[Guest]: might be an undercount actually because you know 20 no longer live in that city uh so given that
[Guest]: there are so many people who are crazy enough to go out and vote why what are the reasons yeah
[Amit Varma]: do i i'll speculate on a why they do vote and b why they should vote because i am torn myself uh
[Amit Varma]: over this i can see both sides of the question one reason people have speculated why they do vote
[Amit Varma]: is that in a sense the act of voting for the party of your choice is almost like a tribal act
[Amit Varma]: similar to supporting your football team by going to the stadium and watching the match so let's say
[Amit Varma]: you are a mumbai indians fan or a manchester united fan or whatever the case may be though
[Amit Varma]: i know many indian manchester united fans have never been to manchester but leave that aside
[Amit Varma]: but it's like okay so you support this cricket team and it becomes like a tribal act of solidarity
[Amit Varma]: and kinship to actually go to the stadium and cheer for your team or even gather with your
[Amit Varma]: friends and you all have beers and you punch the air and though i don't think real fans believe
[Amit Varma]: behave like that that's just what the show on tv when fans are watching whatever a high five yeah
[Amit Varma]: who does a high five in real life and somebody hits a four or maybe i'm just old and jaded by
[Amit Varma]: now so that's that's kind of one reason that it's a signaling thing that they are signaling
[Amit Varma]: their membership and their kinship of these people that they feel solidarity with which might
[Amit Varma]: be also valid given how much of india's politics takes place along lines of identity one possible
[Amit Varma]: reasons among many others it would be absolutely simplistic to say this is the main reason anything
[Amit Varma]: like that i mean a lot of people no doubt do hope for change and so on and so forth uh but i think
[Amit Varma]: the reason why one should vote the normative reason is that look we are a democracy and the
[Amit Varma]: thing is that even if one vote doesn't make a difference it might still be considered you might
[Amit Varma]: still say that no it is still my duty even if it doesn't make a difference to go out and vote
[Amit Varma]: because if everybody does this then you know there is in the end a difference and if i make
[Amit Varma]: the effort of going out and voting then i because i am you know taking that cost upon myself i will
[Amit Varma]: then i might then make the effort to justify that cost of actually going and voting by actually
[Amit Varma]: being more of an informed citizens about things that matter so i can make a a good choice so in
[Amit Varma]: that sense i think you should for example it's it's this and i'm just thinking aloud here and
[Amit Varma]: might not make sense but i think just in the same way that i think it makes sense for us to
[Amit Varma]: normatively follow certain rules in our lives even if in a particular instance we might be able
[Amit Varma]: to breach it for example you might have a rule that i will never lie and or for example you know
[Amit Varma]: i'll take a much simpler example when i drive around if i'm turning left i always turn the
[Amit Varma]: indicator to left now i do this even when there is only a left and everybody is going left and
[Amit Varma]: it's one o'clock in the morning and there's no one on the road with me but i do it anyway it's
[Amit Varma]: a normative act what this means is that a i am saving effort by automating this process
[Amit Varma]: and b it means that at all times i will do this and there is never an occasion where i need to do
[Amit Varma]: it where it so happens that i don't do it and you could say this applies to ethical behavior as well
[Amit Varma]: how you treat other people with courtesy and so on for example should you tip at a restaurant
[Amit Varma]: that you're never going to go to again if you're traveling now i make it a point always to leave a
[Amit Varma]: tip and the thing is then the question comes up is if i'm visiting a city and i'm never going to
[Amit Varma]: go to that restaurant again should i tip and sometimes it's just a good thing to always tip
[Amit Varma]: and there might be different opinions on this and you could say you could in a cold way say
[Amit Varma]: it's rational not to tip but you could also in a similar way say that it is rational to tip every
[Amit Varma]: time because that is normatively a good way to behave within society they are both rational
[Guest]: so it's just become a habit now right yeah it's a habit so in the sense what you talked about
[Guest]: cheering a particular football club or a political party the other is also to say that
[Guest]: look i have done my duty yeah right i'm a citizen i need to go vote in elections i've done my duty
[Guest]: i've done my part now if we get a good government or not at least i've done my job and what's more
[Amit Varma]: if you sort of have a package of behavioral items which make you a good citizen and voting is one of
[Amit Varma]: them then why is that package not something that you do normatively instead of making case by case
[Amit Varma]: exceptions so that is a case that i would make for voting though i'll be honest enough and tell
[Amit Varma]: you that i'm not going to vote this time because i am deeply disappointed at all the choices and i
[Amit Varma]: want to send that signal to the marketplace that come on some political entrepreneur come and give
[Amit Varma]: me something better than this or perhaps i'm just rationalizing my natural half bengali laziness
[Amit Varma]: and i don't have a voter id card so i'll have to jump through bureaucratic hoops to get one
[Guest]: so maybe i'm rationalizing that so i i am hoping to go i don't know what in these elections and
[Guest]: i'm not trying to do what you're signaling right now and yeah to me personally it's
[Guest]: it's not that expensive i don't value my time that highly that i can't do this once every two
[Guest]: three years where i go up to the polls and vote and sometimes you feel good and sometimes you get
[Guest]: to do it as a family so that there is that element of it as well and it's not terribly
[Amit Varma]: inconvenient anymore it's i wouldn't know and let's quickly take a commercial break before
[Unknown]: we continue with the conversation hi everybody welcome to another awesome week on the ivm podcast
[Unknown]: network if you are not following us on social media please make sure you do we're ivm podcasts
[Unknown]: on twitter facebook and instagram we'd like to thank our sponsors this month savari storytell and paytm money
[Unknown]: also guy i just want to remind you that we do these audiograms on our social media audiograms
[Unknown]: are short snippets from episodes which are interesting to listen to check them out i think
[Unknown]: you'll enjoy them also guys we are doing a podcast with ronnie scruvalla called the ronnie scruvalla
[Unknown]: podcast and on that podcast on the last episode we're going to have ronnie answer a bunch of
[Unknown]: listener questions if you'd like to send us a question please send it to us at dreaming at
[Unknown]: ivm podcast.com also do check out our youtube page where we have ronnie talking to cyrus on
[Unknown]: cyrus says we have a bunch of short clips there which i think you'll enjoy on cyrus says best
[Unknown]: selling author and columnist chetan bhagat talks to cyrus about his iit days his new non-fiction
[Unknown]: book india positive and discusses how the 2019 election is different from the 2014 one on
[Unknown]: simplified shorties we dive into the world of wiki leaks and the current news regarding julian
[Unknown]: asanjh on the tfg fantasy sports podcast vivek krishnan and cp thomas are giving our 11 pointers
[Unknown]: that will help you pick your fantasy sports team on ganatantra alok and surya are joined by sanjay
[Unknown]: kumar of the center for the study of developing societies to make sense of exit polls and their
[Unknown]: accuracy and transparency on football twaddle the boys are shortlisting their very own team
[Unknown]: of the season since the epl has ended on puliyabazi pranay and saurabh are joined by amit varma to
[Unknown]: discuss the liberal philosophy of hayek and his relevance in today's india on golgappa trupti is
[Unknown]: joined by makeup artist shraddha nayak she shares her experience of working with shraddha kapoor
[Unknown]: and other bollywood celebrities on echoes of india aniru talks about the origins of the indian
[Unknown]: drama scene in the background of the huns invading the subcontinent and with that let's get you on
[Amit Varma]: with your show welcome back to the scene in the unseen let's get back to my conversation with
[Guest]: pavan srinath on public choice theory amit we've been talking about public choice theory and we've
[Guest]: talked about the the rational calculus of uh voting and uh the incentives that drive politicians
[Guest]: to behave the way politicians behave but what about people who are spending their careers
[Guest]: working in government what about bureaucrats in service what kind of incentives typically drive
[Amit Varma]: most bureaucracies good question and you know typically the idealized view of bureaucrats is
[Amit Varma]: that these are career civil servants who are chosen through a very tough process of selection
[Amit Varma]: they are going to be efficient they're going to be highly intelligent well-trained within this uh
[Amit Varma]: well-oiled system of government surely they will do the right thing but again you have to consider
[Amit Varma]: their incentives and nothing uh you know sort of sums it up better than what is famously known as
[Amit Varma]: parkinson's law which was framed in this book called parkinson's law by c north court parkinson
[Amit Varma]: and if i may quote from that uh parkinson's law says quote work expands so as to fill the time
[Amit Varma]: available for its completion stop code which i think all of us know whenever we have to do
[Amit Varma]: something and uh two of the necessary uh corollaries of this are court an official
[Amit Varma]: wants to multiply subordinates not rivals stop code and court officials make work for each other
[Amit Varma]: stop code and what it kind of tells you is that the natural tendency for any bureaucrat is to want
[Amit Varma]: to increase his power to have a bigger department to have bigger budgets to be more influential
[Amit Varma]: and and to feel more relevant to justify their position more so in fact there's a um a famous
[Amit Varma]: author called william in his canon who's who's written pioneering books on this in the late 60s
[Amit Varma]: and 70s and so on including a famous book called bureaucracy and public economics so he says that
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrats are motivated by quote salary perks of the office public reputation power patronage
[Amit Varma]: and the ease of managing the bureau stop code and the result of this is that every bureaucrat
[Amit Varma]: will attempt to expand his power and you will simply never have an occasion when a bureaucrat
[Amit Varma]: is giving up any power let me tell you a great story of this have you ever heard of this government
[Amit Varma]: department that used to exist in tamil nadu called cca i've heard of it but let me tell
[Amit Varma]: you the story because it's a great story and i love telling it so in about 1984 and i think
[Amit Varma]: vivek debroy first told the story in an old book of his so credit where that is due in 1984
[Amit Varma]: the central government got an application from a government department of the in the government
[Amit Varma]: of tamil nadu as far as i recall and the department was called cca and the department was applying for
[Amit Varma]: higher budgets right so he decided let me look into what is the cca and what do they need higher
[Amit Varma]: budgets for so he looked into it and uh his investigation his forensic investigation into
[Amit Varma]: the origins of cca took him back to world war ii now so what happened there was when world war ii
[Amit Varma]: was on winston churchill who used to smoke cigars used to get his cigars from cuba so the supply
[Amit Varma]: lines from cuba dried up so instead what he decided to do is the second best cigars in the
[Amit Varma]: world apparently were in a factory somewhere near what was then madras right so i think that
[Amit Varma]: the trichinopoly cigars wherever i don't know where they're from but it was somewhere in tamil
[Amit Varma]: nadu you had good cigars happening so churchill started getting his cigars from this place in
[Amit Varma]: tamil nadu and the imperial office and at that time of course india was part of the british
[Amit Varma]: empire so a department was set up which would get him those cigars and the department was called
[Amit Varma]: cca churchill cigar assistant right so cca stands for churchill cigar assistant the department was
[Amit Varma]: set up at the time of the second world war to send cigars to churchill world war ii has ended
[Amit Varma]: supply lines between cuba and england are open winston churchill is out of power winston churchill
[Amit Varma]: has died okay india has become independent and we've come all the way to 1984 and that department
[Amit Varma]: called the churchill cigar assistant is still running still has a budget still has a
[Amit Varma]: under secretary or whatever who has the gall to apply for a raise right a raise in the budget
[Amit Varma]: and what this kind of illustrates is that once you add a little bit of responsibility or power
[Amit Varma]: to government no one's given it up bro it's like uh so government never gets smaller it only gets
[Amit Varma]: bigger and bigger in all these mad different directions and in this particular case of course
[Amit Varma]: department was abolished when the central secretary or whatever just send what was
[Amit Varma]: what i suppose would have been bureaucraties equivalent of wtf bro what are you doing
[Amit Varma]: and so the department went off but this kind of illustrates or bureaucrats are always going to
[Amit Varma]: add to their power as far as possible and this is a process which is quite separate from who the
[Amit Varma]: politician in power may be or what his incentives may be politicians doing his own thing up on top
[Amit Varma]: with state x checker bureaucrat meanwhile is quietly sitting expanding his power and
[Amit Varma]: managing his risk to reward ratio and seeing that everything flows well so this budget
[Guest]: maximization drive is something that i've come across many times and there are a few who have
[Guest]: used it to their advantage so if you know that these are the interests of someone in power like
[Guest]: for example um you know before the jnn urm started and the reason i like that national urban renewal
[Guest]: mission scheme is simply because it was the first time sort of the government of india woke up and
[Guest]: said hey cities are important to us not so much about what happened with the scheme and that
[Guest]: happened because the urban development ministry was almost like a punishment posting you know
[Guest]: it's a small department you know rural development has always been gigantic so therefore the person
[Guest]: in charge would not have a large budget to command but supposing india started this national mission
[Guest]: on urban renewal then it is in the interest of that person in charge over there to bat for it
[Guest]: because ultimately he or she also gets a much larger budget at their disposal so this seems
[Guest]: to happen at all levels right so one is maximizing their budgets and then creating more work to meet
[Amit Varma]: the budget yeah and this is why you know no matter what party comes into power saying minimum
[Amit Varma]: government and maximum governance or whatever nonsense so i don't think prime minister modi
[Amit Varma]: g even intended to carry out those promises of his but even had he intended the pushback would
[Amit Varma]: have been enormous because the point is politicians are on a tangent of their own bureaucrats are in
[Amit Varma]: a tangent of their own arguably bureaucrats are more powerful in a sense because they hold all
[Amit Varma]: the levers of the state so supposing for example you have the ayush ministry which does homeopathy
[Amit Varma]: and ayurveda and you know all of that stuff and you decide that no we need to abolish this
[Amit Varma]: department it's a waste of taxpayers money we are inflicting violence on taxpayers for what not
[Amit Varma]: for this but the point is politician gives the order it goes to bureaucrat he says yes sir
[Amit Varma]: let's do it. I'll make a committee because there are 8000 people who work here how do we fire them
[Amit Varma]: what do we do blah blah blah blah blah blah what are the procedures let's make a committee
[Amit Varma]: committee will sit committee will come back after six months then there'll be this procedural
[Amit Varma]: problem then the ministry of finance will get involved this ministry falana ministry dimkara
[Amit Varma]: ministry and before you know it the politician is focused on the short-term imperative of winning
[Amit Varma]: the next election which is giving farm loan waiver or whatever it is and these structural reforms
[Amit Varma]: are forgotten and shit never happens and everything grows and even that committee you set up
[Amit Varma]: in the first place becomes a permanent committee and that's the nature of the beast it's like it's
[Guest]: mind-blowing what do you do so in this one thing i feel is like you know yes minister the show from
[Guest]: the 80s pretty much talks about every one of these issues right i mean many times when we're
[Guest]: talking about lots of things happening in indian politics we teach public policy courses as well
[Guest]: honestly i think i can learn more from that show than most of the courses that i attend
[Guest]: but what i found interesting was that even that show was created in the light of public choice
[Amit Varma]: theory and ideas coming to the fore right you know yes minister is mind-blowing and why is it
[Amit Varma]: that people love that show and find it so funny because like all great humor it has that ring of
[Amit Varma]: truth that they see what is happening and they're like you know it's both real and it's funny like
[Amit Varma]: for example another great book that you know captures the nature of the indian state and was
[Amit Varma]: written in the late 1960s is raag darbari by shrilal shukla now i can guarantee you that
[Amit Varma]: shrilal shukla ji never read james bookannon or william niskanen or any of these people god
[Amit Varma]: interluck but he had the artist's eye for what is at the core of every situation and he captures
[Amit Varma]: the absurdity of the indian state and the indian bureaucracy so beautifully that you know and
[Amit Varma]: that's why that book is such a revered classic in india and it's just magnificent and you know
[Amit Varma]: what is art supposed to do art is supposed to reveal the human condition which both yes minister
[Amit Varma]: and raag darbari do but also the human condition can be revealed by the social sciences public
[Amit Varma]: choice economics can also then in a forensic way explain why is it that people behave in these
[Amit Varma]: absurd ways and explain why something like churchill cigar assistant exists till 1984 and
[Guest]: why it is rational for that to be the case so i mean given so all of this so the bureaucrat then
[Guest]: so one work expands budgets expand there is also risk aversion because playing it safe means that
[Guest]: you don't get into trouble taking a risk means maybe there's a reward but you know more if things
[Guest]: go wrong then you're in more trouble and the reward can't be that you get to double your salary or
[Guest]: your position or something right you're still in that same system with uh of slowly escalating
[Guest]: ladder that goes upwards so given all of this can we also talk a little bit about how
[Guest]: corruption can be broken down into different things by public choice theory yeah i think
[Amit Varma]: you know the thing is corruption is india's great big problem but it is a symptom it is not a root
[Amit Varma]: cause of any specific disease right and i think uh you know most indians all indians would agree
[Amit Varma]: that corruption is a huge problem but i don't think there's enough of an adequate appreciation
[Amit Varma]: of what causes corruption corruption is not caused by bad people
[Amit Varma]: you put a good person there the good person won't take a bribe no that is not what causes
[Amit Varma]: corruption is caused by power right you give one set of people power over another set of people
[Amit Varma]: they will be corrupt because as lord acton said power corrupts absolute power corrupts absolutely
[Amit Varma]: and i would sort of say something which seems extremist but i kind of believe in it i would
[Amit Varma]: say power always corrupts it is in the nature of power to corrupt because your incentives change
[Amit Varma]: completely now what the problem with the indian state is that i often say the indian state is
[Amit Varma]: both too large and too weak it's too weak because it doesn't do the few things it ought
[Amit Varma]: to do properly like maintain rule of law or whatever the few basic things reasonable people
[Amit Varma]: can all agree on doesn't have enough manpower doesn't have straight capacity doesn't do them
[Amit Varma]: properly it is too large because it has too much procedure it might have too few people in some
[Amit Varma]: places it has too much procedure in some other places now what is that procedure that procedure
[Amit Varma]: is for example if you are starting a business and you need 40 licenses and for each one somebody has
[Amit Varma]: a power to end your dreams so you have to pay them right and you know like i did an episode on
[Amit Varma]: restaurant regulations many months ago and one of the revelations in in that episode was that
[Amit Varma]: restaurant regulations at least in karnataka they have these two conflicting regulations where
[Amit Varma]: the excise people or rather the people who look after alcohol say that a restaurant should only
[Amit Varma]: have one entrance so they can monitor the inflow and outflow of alcohol only one entrance that is
[Amit Varma]: mandated the fire department mandates that for safety purposes you have to have more than one
[Amit Varma]: entrance so you have multiple entrances now the point is you whatever you however many entrances
[Amit Varma]: you do you are breaking the law if you have one entrance fire department will come after you if
[Amit Varma]: you have two entrances the alcohol guys will come after you so you have to bribe one of them and
[Amit Varma]: the truth of the matter is you don't have to bribe one of them you have to bribe two of them
[Amit Varma]: and you have to bribe the other 30 authorities involved which can this enough on the margins is
[Amit Varma]: enough to stop new businesses opening and to drive many existing businesses which would otherwise be
[Amit Varma]: barely profitable out of business and all of this is because you're giving discretion to government
[Amit Varma]: servants who have the power to use this and if you think about it you know a lot of what people
[Amit Varma]: who should be looking after the rule of law stopping violence investigating murders and
[Amit Varma]: rapes a lot of that effort instead goes on into figuring out how can we make money on the side
[Amit Varma]: because of all these bad laws like many years back i had written a column called the matunga
[Amit Varma]: racket and what the matunga racket was at that time 377 was still on the cards which made
[Amit Varma]: homosexual sex effectively illegal so what the matunga racket would do is that these cops would
[Amit Varma]: go on these online forums no grinder in those days were in 2007-2008 they would go on these
[Amit Varma]: online forums and they would pretend to be gay men looking for other gay men and they would call
[Amit Varma]: so and so to a spot near matunga station and the poor chap would turn up expecting an exciting
[Amit Varma]: rendezvous and three cops would surround him and they would say okay we'll file 377 or we'll call
[Amit Varma]: your home and tell your parents or whatever unless matlab ki atm jaate hain put the guy's card in
[Amit Varma]: take out whatever they feel like so on and so forth so i i wrote about it and it was a very
[Amit Varma]: common racket and now it can't take place why because the discretion in the context of that
[Amit Varma]: law is gone that law is gone so you cannot anymore catch a gay man at a railway station
[Amit Varma]: and extort money from him like this and a lot of what these bad laws do a lot of what these bad
[Amit Varma]: regulations do is they amount to extortion and the people who are supposed to protect your rights
[Amit Varma]: instead become the people who are extorting money from you and so this has been a bit of
[Amit Varma]: a tangent but my central point is that to end corruption the best way to do it is a is a
[Amit Varma]: twofold thing one is you reduce the discretion of the government in areas where the government
[Amit Varma]: has no business being like the government has no business being in your bedroom as ever with 377
[Amit Varma]: you remove laws like that and the government has no business deciding which business should exist
[Amit Varma]: and who has a license or doesn't have a license take it out of that you know have complete ease
[Amit Varma]: of business remove all of that rent seeking that is one way and the other way is in areas where
[Amit Varma]: government does have to have power because there has to be a rule of law in certain areas government
[Amit Varma]: will have power in those areas you figure out ways and to change the incentives by making it
[Amit Varma]: more accountable and the key to that is by having governance which is as local as possible like on
[Amit Varma]: the scene and the unseen i had my guest shruti rajgopalan who's actually a much bigger expert
[Amit Varma]: in public choice economics and i could ever claim to be i'm just an enthusiast and shruti
[Amit Varma]: spoke about urban governance from the point of the mismatch over power and governance
[Amit Varma]: that your local legislator who you have control over uh you have power over doesn't actually he
[Amit Varma]: can't do anything for you and the people who can do something for you are the state legislatures
[Amit Varma]: who depend on the rural vote they don't give a shit about you so if governance is as local as
[Amit Varma]: possible if cities have strong empowered mayors village panchayats are empowered as they are to
[Amit Varma]: some degree now and you fix all of those local governance problems then you make them more
[Amit Varma]: accountable so dual solution reduce discretion where not required and where you need the presence
[Amit Varma]: of the state make it more accountable by making government more local and figuring out other ways
[Guest]: for better incentives so in a way this is also bringing in many market principles into even
[Guest]: governmental thinking and so one along with discretion while i mean local can be a lot
[Guest]: better one of the big challenges happens when there are local monopolies right true so in
[Guest]: one area somebody has complete control so they have absolute power over a tiny geography which
[Guest]: does not necessarily lead to better i agree you need competition and to me one of the really nice
[Guest]: things i saw happen in karnataka over the last decade or so is you know there was a point in
[Guest]: time when say if i had to get a driving license and i lived in i don't know malaysia in bangalore
[Guest]: i had to go to the malaysia regional transport office and then you know you have the touts you
[Guest]: have the driving schools you have that whole ecosystem they have the power of the monopoly
[Guest]: they use it so and then you have to do all kinds of things even to get a learner's license and then
[Guest]: a driving license and then at one point the karnataka government i can just decided uh that
[Guest]: you know they're just going to open this up the state is giving you a license so if you're a
[Guest]: resident of the state go to whichever rto you find convenient and you can get it done so i can
[Guest]: go to koramangala i can go to jayanagar yes the distance might be a little more but apart from
[Guest]: that now citizens had the agency to go and choose the slightly less corrupt rto where at least you
[Guest]: know you could get things done a little more quickly or you had a little more certainty
[Guest]: where maybe you knew that you had to wait a certain time but you knew that you would get it
[Guest]: you know there have been so many cases i think um with the learner's license you have to do like a
[Guest]: 15 multiple choice questions right and you have to pass i think 13 or 12 and a lot of people would
[Guest]: say would get 11 saying oh you only got 11 come back next time and you can then pass the thing so
[Guest]: that kind of discretionary power simply because there was competition the equilibrium level of
[Guest]: corruption reduced and even today rtos are corrupt but i would argue that slightly less than
[Amit Varma]: yeah i i think that's a fantastic example and i think what that also illustrates is that
[Amit Varma]: you should not think you know when you're thinking of solutions you should not set utopian standards
[Amit Varma]: for them you should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good like you said these rtos will
[Amit Varma]: still be corrupt but they'll be less corrupt because they're competing with each other to
[Amit Varma]: attract customers who will pay bribes and that is an improvement on the previous system where you
[Amit Varma]: had a monopolistic discretion and therefore you could be basically as corrupt as you want to you
[Guest]: could get away with in that the the same when it comes to laws right i mean you talked about badly
[Guest]: framed laws i mean we have this it act section 66a which finally got taken down right i mean it
[Guest]: had horrendous language on you know just behavior online where you could drive a truck through
[Guest]: something right oh if you're hurting public sentiments or something vague and loose like
[Guest]: that the government come after you and file a case so which is why i think innocent people
[Guest]: posting messages on facebook got arrested by the police which is not just the it law it's
[Amit Varma]: even 295a 153a the laws in the indian penal code which again are imprecisely framed because they
[Amit Varma]: are like a threat to public order or whatever uh you know um uh offending religious sentiments
[Amit Varma]: uh and and which can't even be challenged because the justification for them is uh in
[Amit Varma]: uh the exceptions laid out and i think article 191a in the indian constitution
[Amit Varma]: which basically the the first part of that guarantees the right to free speech but then
[Amit Varma]: add so many caveats that is meaningless like public order decency and you're giving the
[Amit Varma]: authorities the discretion to decide what is public order and what is decency and so on
[Amit Varma]: though in this particular case i must say that the problem with these laws is not that they are
[Amit Varma]: used for end seeking or extortion to the best of my knowledge that doesn't happen much but that
[Amit Varma]: they are misused by miscreants who file cases against you unnecessarily when really we should
[Guest]: have absolute free speech in this country right so in a sense it empowers mobs and it also empowers
[Guest]: errant governments who want to crack down on dissent exactly exactly so if a government
[Amit Varma]: wants to crack down on dissent this is a very powerful tool to use and it has a chilling effect
[Amit Varma]: because you arrest one kid for putting up an anti-establishment facebook post and then you
[Amit Varma]: know 30 other kids who might have also done that will not do that anymore and that harms democracy
[Amit Varma]: but that's of course a tangent but you know going back to something you said earlier you know where
[Amit Varma]: you gave your insights on how competition within the framework of government itself like in those
[Amit Varma]: giving driving licenses in karnataka can help reduce corruption and you refer to that as market
[Amit Varma]: principles i would say that you know market for a lot of people just a very term market based or
[Guest]: market principle seems to be a pejorative for some reason i have written articles i have colleagues
[Guest]: who have written articles and newspapers where they've used the word market the entire article
[Amit Varma]: has been reprinted but the word market has been removed yeah so i would i would actually call it
[Amit Varma]: and more accurately i would call it principles of human behavior because it is you know you don't
[Amit Varma]: need economics or an understanding of markets to realize that humans respond to incentives which
[Amit Varma]: kind of brings me to another point that you know a lot of people will often say ki yaar this
[Amit Varma]: government is headed by an authoritarian madman but you put the right people in charge everything
[Amit Varma]: will be okay and my point to that always is that no the solution is not the right people in charge
[Amit Varma]: the solution is a system where the incentives are such that whoever is in charge will do the
[Amit Varma]: right things or will not be able to do damage that's what you need you know i had an episode
[Amit Varma]: on the emergency with the historian gyan prakash and he pointed out that even though you look at
[Amit Varma]: the emergency of indira gandhi as a monstrous act on her part uh everything she did was legitimate
[Amit Varma]: according to the constitution the framers of the constitution because they wrote the constitution
[Amit Varma]: at a time when the country was in much turmoil outside gave a lot of power to the center which
[Amit Varma]: they may not have under other circumstances which the center should not have in a democratic
[Amit Varma]: republic and indira gandhi managed to use those powers to suspend democracy and but those were
[Amit Varma]: in the constitution they were out there so the system was flawed it could have been some other
[Amit Varma]: demagogue and not her similarly you know when a few months back modi arrested a bunch of these
[Amit Varma]: uh activists like arun ferreira and gautam navlakha and so on and there was much criticism
[Amit Varma]: correctly of those actions but the issue there wasn't modi per se all of these people were
[Amit Varma]: arrested under laws which had been framed by the upa before this all of these people or most of
[Amit Varma]: these people had been arrested by the upa before this arun ferreira had been arrested by the upa
[Amit Varma]: and spent two years in jail and i think wrote a book about it as well uh which i recommend everyone
[Amit Varma]: should read so the thing is the problem is not this party or that party this guy is a good person
[Amit Varma]: that guy is a bad person people respond to incentives you need to change the incentives
[Amit Varma]: when you have a structure of government where people have so much power it will corrupt them
[Amit Varma]: not in ways that you know financial corruption ki rent seeking sipai salya it will corrupt them
[Guest]: in a moral and philosophical sense so and that moral and philosophical corruption becomes equally
[Guest]: important uh as much as financial corruption right it's far worse you know you could argue
[Amit Varma]: that for example that there are so many procedures and you know government makes it in so many areas
[Amit Varma]: so difficult to do things that that kind of financial petty corruption is actually useful
[Amit Varma]: in making sure things happen otherwise they would get stuck forever i so you know that is a sort of
[Amit Varma]: perverse way of looking at corruption but petty corruption or even grand corruption when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to money is not as bad as the moral corrosiveness that is a more dangerous form of corruption
[Amit Varma]: because what does that do when the entire political system is like this it basically
[Amit Varma]: guarantees that anyone who enters politics is only entering politics with the wrong intentions
[Amit Varma]: because he's looking at the incentives in play uh you know he doesn't want to serve the people per
[Amit Varma]: se he wants to or he doesn't want to you know make the world a better place and so on and so forth
[Amit Varma]: all of those noble things he is driven by the lust for power he knows what it will take to get there
[Amit Varma]: which is a lot of dubious activity and when he gets there to stay in power he will have to
[Amit Varma]: you know pay back those favors that he's got along the way or deliver on all those quid pro
[Amit Varma]: quos and that's the whole system so you are in this system where you have a citizenry that is
[Amit Varma]: held captive by the state and this is the nature of the state and it is pretty depressing so given
[Guest]: that this is pretty depressing what then gives us hope how does public choice also gives us hope i
[Guest]: mean is the field itself fairly depressing in that manner in how it diagnoses problems or
[Guest]: it's speaking truth and the world uh is full of suffering if we go back to the buddha
[Amit Varma]: well they do call economics the dismal science but i would say in this case it gives us hope
[Amit Varma]: see what gives us hope is that what gives me hope is india and against corruption movement
[Amit Varma]: for example now the movement was completely wrong-minded because anna hazare and kejriwal
[Amit Varma]: lost the clue completely when they uh talk of solving corruption by creating more government
[Amit Varma]: right and more committees and more whatever and more oversight and you don't solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: of too much government by creating more government they miss the fact of the root causes of all of
[Amit Varma]: this that you need very limited government you need to remove discretion you need to whatever
[Amit Varma]: but what it indicated is that people were animated by the problem of corruption
[Amit Varma]: that they were willing to come out on the streets and they were willing to fight about it and take
[Amit Varma]: things into their own hand now it isn't that people are apathetic it isn't that people are
[Amit Varma]: giving up people care people suffer from this in their daily lives it's just that uh they have
[Amit Varma]: an intuitive but simplistic understanding of what the problem is the problem is not bad people the
[Amit Varma]: problem is not this party bad that party good the problem is the incentives in play and if there is
[Amit Varma]: a greater understanding of this then perhaps they will start asking for the right things
[Amit Varma]: like already for example uh you know and society does change like already we saw last year 377
[Amit Varma]: disappearing let me tell you when i wrote my piece samatunga racket 10 12 years ago i never
[Amit Varma]: imagined the law will ever go i thought the subject of the law going comes up there will
[Amit Varma]: be all these traditionalist homophobes who will oppose uh the striking down of 377 but it has
[Amit Varma]: gone and it has gone to widespread acclaim and you find bollywood and mainstream popular culture
[Amit Varma]: now treating homosexuality in a completely normal way like with the brilliant tv series
[Amit Varma]: made in heaven or other movies that are getting made and that is just brilliant it shows that
[Amit Varma]: society and culture can move in that positive direction towards freedom and if you think
[Amit Varma]: about it the strongest incentives in politics come from voters voters are indispensable in a
[Amit Varma]: democracy so if these ideas spread enough and things like yes minister and g mantri ji and
[Amit Varma]: ragdar bari do help in spreading these ideas across but if more of these ideas spread into
[Amit Varma]: the popular culture and people start understanding the importance of incentives and how to design
[Amit Varma]: systems then maybe there'll be popular outcry which comes out with the right solutions and we
[Amit Varma]: can be a great nation again do i sound inspiring enough for you to vote for me maybe yeah if you're
[Guest]: starting a liberal party a few years from now then i think you're on to something oh my god we
[Guest]: have something here you heard it here first uh amit uh thank you so much uh for coming on the
[Amit Varma]: pragadi podcast uh it's always a pleasure to have you back here it's my privilege to be here pavan
[Amit Varma]: thank you so much for having me if you enjoyed listening to the show you can follow me on
[Amit Varma]: twitter at amit varma a-m-i-t-b-a-r-m-a and you can follow pavan at zs is dead z-e-u-s-i-s-d-e-a-d
[Amit Varma]: and do check out and subscribe to pavan show the pragati podcast at ivmpodcast.com or thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: i had been on a previous episode of the pragati podcast to speak about libertarianism which also
[Amit Varma]: ran as a special episode of the scene in the unseen and you can check out a link to that in
[Amit Varma]: our show notes you can view all our archives at seen unseen.in and thinkpragati.com the scene
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen is supported by the takshashila institution an independent center for research
[Amit Varma]: and education in public policy takshashila institution offers 12-week courses in public
[Amit Varma]: policy technology policy and strategic studies for both full-time students and working professionals
[Amit Varma]: visit takshashila.org.in for more details thank you for listening
[Unknown]: wherever you listen to your podcast from
[Unknown]: do you wish you are smarter well so do we but the next best thing we could make you sound
[Unknown]: smarter and to help you with this endeavor we are simplified a podcast uh that attempts to break
[Unknown]: down the complex world around you with a little knowledge a lot of poor jokes and a ton of random
[Unknown]: trivia episodes out every monday on the ivm podcast app or wherever you get your podcasts